---
title: Advice for Tech Recruiters at Universities
layout: post
category: post
tags: recruiting college
---

I attended half a dozen information sessions by companies trying to hire
interns in the 2009-2010 academic year. Most of them were seeking the same
thing: bright students with technical backgrounds, generally Computer Science
majors. Some did it very effectively, with good presentations and knowledgeable
representatives who could answer questions and give advice. Others did little
to impress or inform, leaving students with bad impressions. At my school,
there are far more open positions than there are students qualified or willing
to fill them, so companies really have to market themselves in order to attract
good employees.

I don't think a bad info session is necessarily an indicator of a bad company.
An info session can do good for both the student and the company, but
ultimately it is like a résumé: uneventful unless you fail. As a student who
has been looking for a new job every year for the past three years, here are
some requests I have for companies giving info sessions on college campuses
with the intention of making them more helpful for everyone.

## Send an Engineer

The most frustrating aspect of many info sessions is the absence of a person
who can answer questions about the day-to-day activities of software developers
at the company. Since software engineering is a discipline in which it is
common for interns to do work comparable to work that full time employees do,
it is important for us to be able to ask questions about the nature of that
work and get answers formed from experience. If I can't ask about your
development process, testing methods, software and system architecture, and
office culture, then how can I distinguish you from other companies who make
similar products?

## Know Your Product

I am surprised when I see recruiters falter at basic questions about products
or demos, but it happens often enough that it almost shouldn't be a surprise
anymore. Even if there isn't an engineer present, recruiters should be
expecting certain kinds of questions from the tech-oriented audience that they
intentionally attracted. I am referring to queries about features of the
product, basic back end information, and future plans.

## Don't Focus on the Perks

Yes, college students like to party. But we don't like to party because the
party is some kind of sacred ritual, we like it because our friends are there.
If your office parties are great, then it must be because of the people.
Instead of talking about parties, talk about people! Focusing on perks like
these is like saying that flying is better than driving because of the
complementary drinks.

Some kinds of perks, like location, are similar across most companies. We
understand that your company is located in a beautiful city with history and
landmarks, but so are most other companies (except Epic). Isn't America
wonderful?

## Don't Force Hipness

Tasteful graphic design and informal attitudes are wonderful, but please back
it up with substance. Words with extra Zs, overuse of "Gen Y lingo," and overt
ego stroking can make your pitch seem a little creepy. Do you really want to
attract the people who respond best when addressed as "Genius?"

## Get Me Invested In Your Company

During the academic year, we work long hours and stretch our minds to the
breaking point. We do this because our work is crucial to our lives and we are
surrounded by people who are working as hard as we are. We can put this energy
and motivation into your company, but it's not free. You need to get us
invested.

What does your company make? What is special about how you make it? How is your
company changing the world? Why is your team uniquely amazing? Knowing the
answers to these questions will help us understand why we should respect you
and desire to work with you. When we do come to work for you, that storm of
motivation will be channeled directly into your products.

## Tell Me What I'll Learn

Many recruiters seem to think that all students are after is a paycheck,
parties, and "work experience." This is not the case at all. Keep in mind why
we are in college: to set us up for success after graduation. If I think
working for you would hold me back intellectually, then why would I work for
you?

## Teach Me Something

The companies that are most sought after by students are the ones who offer
more than just a sales pitch. If you give a workshop, presentation, or
demonstration of a piece of technology your company uses, you may attract more
students who are interested in learning more about that technology and would be
a good fit for your company. In addition, you showcase the technical prowess of
your company and the knowledge of the students' potential future coworkers.

That's all for now! If you're coming to Case Western, be sure to get in touch
with the [CWRU Hacker Society](http://hacsoc.org/).


